
string.pack (fmt, v1, v2, ···)

Returns a binary string containing the values v1, v2, etc. packed (that is, serialized in binary form) according to the format string fmt (see §6.4.2).

string.packsize (fmt)

Returns the size of a string resulting from string.pack with the given format. The format string cannot have the variable-length options 's' or 'z' (see §6.4.2).

string.unpack (fmt, s [, pos])

Returns the values packed in string s (see string.pack) according to the format string fmt (see §6.4.2). An optional pos marks where to start reading in s (default is 1). After the read values, this function also returns the index of the first unread byte in s.


6.4.2 – Format Strings for Pack and Unpack

The first argument to string.pack, string.packsize, and string.unpack is a format string, which describes the layout of the structure being created or read.

A format string is a sequence of conversion options. The conversion options are as follows:

<: sets little endian
>: sets big endian
=: sets native endian
![n]: sets maximum alignment to n (default is native alignment)
b: a signed byte (char)
B: an unsigned byte (char)
h: a signed short (native size)
H: an unsigned short (native size)
l: a signed long (native size)
L: an unsigned long (native size)
j: a lua_Integer
J: a lua_Unsigned
T: a size_t (native size)
i[n]: a signed int with n bytes (default is native size)
I[n]: an unsigned int with n bytes (default is native size)
f: a float (native size)
d: a double (native size)
n: a lua_Number
cn: a fixed-sized string with n bytes
z: a zero-terminated string
s[n]: a string preceded by its length coded as an unsigned integer with n bytes (default is a size_t)
x: one byte of padding
Xop: an empty item that aligns according to option op (which is otherwise ignored)
' ': (empty space) ignored
(A "[n]" means an optional integral numeral.) Except for padding, spaces, and configurations (options "xX <=>!"), each option corresponds to an argument (in string.pack) or a result (in string.unpack).

For options "!n", "sn", "in", and "In", n can be any integer between 1 and 16. All integral options check overflows; string.pack checks whether the given value fits in the given size; string.unpack checks whether the read value fits in a Lua integer.

Any format string starts as if prefixed by "!1=", that is, with maximum alignment of 1 (no alignment) and native endianness.

Alignment works as follows: For each option, the format gets extra padding until the data starts at an offset that is a multiple of the minimum between the option size and the maximum alignment; this minimum must be a power of 2. Options "c" and "z" are not aligned; option "s" follows the alignment of its starting integer.

All padding is filled with zeros by string.pack (and ignored by string.unpack).
